hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery here
another China history podcast episode
161 this time a topic that if I had a
nickel for every time it was requested
it would pay for a couple of nice
dinners at my local Denny's off the
senior menu of course anyone who is
listen to these podcasts over the years
knows that I hold Joe and Lyon quite
high esteem
he has his detractors though and will
look at more than just the myth of Joe
and life was he really as wonderful a
man of the people and a leader as the
propaganda suggested or was he as wrong
John and John Holliday described him
quote a ruthless apparatchik in thrall
to his communist faith who served the
party with a dauntless lack of personal
integrity and quote you could be the
judge of that as far as all my Chinese
friends acquaintances and people I chit
chatted with over the past thirty years
Joe Tom Lee has a perfect score
never once can I ever recall when any
friends from China said he was no good
for whatever reason Joe from the
founding of the People's Republic in
1949 until the day he passed away in
January of 1976 was always ranked number
three in the communist leadership
pecking order it was always Mao first
then whoever was Mouse successor at the
time Leo sha Chi Ling Qiao Wang home won
or Quaqua Fung and then Joe always third
way back when you may recall I did that
eight part overview on the life of Don
Chao paying CHP 63 to 70 dung was Joe
and lies creation you can see from very
early on how dung modeled himself uncho
in many ways in this series will look at
that magnificent story that we've all
heard before how from the time of the
May Fourth Movement and into the 20s 30s
and 40s a new China was sculpted out of
a nasty century of humiliation
my fellow Americans Keyes might know of
Joe and life from the week that changed
the world that epical event in February
72 when Nixon went to China and the door
was finally opened ya Chou Enlai is he
used to say on TV we all know he was
China's premier and that he played a
major role in Foreign Relations or maybe
that he was Chairman Mao's right-hand
man beyond that not much more I hope by
the time of the final episode you could
have a fuller understanding appreciation
of Joanne lies life today we'll look at
his early years including the role he
played in the history of the Communist
Party in the episodes to follow we'll
look at the scope of his
responsibilities and the day-to-day
running of China China's foreign
relations and party affairs - in today's
episode we'll see early on he had
exceptional abilities that weren't hard
to notice he didn't rise through the
ranks just on good looks alone I've said
it time and again
and that CHP 46 episode and in other
episodes that the movement that grew out
of the may 4th incident is what did it
as far as almost all of China's future
leaders were concerned it was a
watershed moment for Joanne lie as much
as it was for Mao Zedong May 4th 1919 it
was like a sudden awakening but before
Jose started walking in that direction
he had a whole upbringing that happened
first the people in his early ears made
sure he had an education and provided
him with a challenging life experience
chock filled with all kinds of lessons
all these people and circumstances he
faced are what shaped him and led him to
be the natural choice later on when the
party was considering leadership
positions in the movement three cities
get to claim Joe and lie as one of their
sons he was born in white on northern
chang-su province a city on the grand
canal that today is an urban population
of two and a half million the second
city is Shaoxing the place that Joe
considered himself to be a son of this
was where the ancestral Joe family home
was located the third city to claim Joe
and lie as one of their own was Tianjin
this was where he was living when the
events happened that
radicalized Joe and led him to the path
that led to the ultimate founding of the
PRC in 1949 he was born March 5th 1898
Saint birthday to song mei-ling
interestingly enough I don't know if
they ever exchanged birthday cards Joe
and lies paternal grandfather Joe pon
long was a government official who never
rose to the top but was at least capable
enough to rise to the level of a county
magistrate and why on some time in the
1870s Joe pon Long's ancestral town was
Shaoxing and he was on his deathbed when
Joe and I was born the Joe family was
one of those that once had it good but
China in the last half of the 19th
century couldn't have been more down on
its luck so with the slow demise of the
Ching government so went the fortunes of
the Joe family and fly on nonetheless
the family compound was still spacious
90 rooms Joe's father Joey yung was the
second son of Japan long he wasn't a bad
guy he just wasn't much of a go-getter I
suppose he could say he was like a
journeyman working here and working
there one thing's for sure he wasn't
around much when his eldest son and Lai
was growing up but that wasn't such a
bad thing
if everything grows from the root you
could consider three women to be the
ones chiefly responsible for Joe and Lai
turning out to be who he was one was his
mother one Don are the other was his
adoptive mother who we know is lady Chen
and last there was his wet nurse who we
know as Jia each one played their
critical role in Joe's earliest days
with his education teaching traditional
Confucian values in all aspects of
Chinese culture his wet nurse Jung often
took young Joe and lied to the other
side of the railroad tracks where she
lived like Caesar who grew up in the
Savera Joe the relatively highborn got
an early taste of mixing with the masses
and learned to be then feel comfortable
with them the Joe's may have fallen on
hard times but they were still a
distinguished and respected family a
family in their social circumstances
normally would not mix with these less
alleged elements of society when young
Jo and I was barely four months old he
was given to the family of Joey nuns
youngest brother Joey con
this was Jo Ann lies shushil this dying
uncle wracked with tuberculosis seemed
destined to die without a son and heir
and this ultimately meant that he had no
one to perform the ancestral rites for
him but older brother Joey not without a
second thought aloud his only son to be
adopted by this childless didi Joe Egan
and his wife Lady Chun Joey Nong was
still healthy and theoretically had
plenty of years left to produce more
songs later on indeed in 1899 Joe Egan
died and from that point on his widow
lady Chun took a heavy hand and Joe in
lies upbringing and education they all
lived in the same family compound and
Joe had his adoptive and natural mother
with him throughout these early
childhood years so the two women
exchanged traditional and legal roles
were by lady Chun acted as his moochin
or mother and his natural mother wand on
our was relegated to ganma or adoptive
mother status wand on ours father was a
scholar official and her mother came
from peasant stock Joe would sometimes
make hay about his ear quotes
peasant background thanks to his mother
but for all intents and purposes he grew
up in a family of scholar officials
serving the ching government in 1904
Joe's father received a job posting
elsewhere and for a while the Joe family
moved in with Wanda Lamar's father Joe
analyzed Wycombe this was a nice
traditional Chinese scholars home filled
with books and all the classics that had
been passed down since the time of the
100 schools young Joe and ly studied at
the one family school and began his
education all the great novels of the
Ming and Ching he consumed those too Joe
the witty intellectual and aspiring
writer and great communicator probably
grew out of this
stay at his white Gong's but the good
times were not to last
19:07 his mother died of esophageal
cancer and the following summer 1908
his adoptive mother Lady Chun also
passed away suddenly to pay for his
mother's funeral the Zhuo family had to
liquidate a lot of their possessions it
didn't bring ruination upon them but
when lady Chun passed so suddenly in the
wake of Guangdong our that broke the
bank and they were hardly enough baubles
and family heirlooms to cover the cost
of course there was never any thought
about whether or not funds should be
allocated for a proper funeral it was
done according to the custom and if it
bankrupted the family that's the way it
was back then you had to do what she had
to do in 1908 Joe and Lai all of 10
years old was now in charge of his
family there was no time to waste being
a kid
Joe had mouths to feed and a family to
maintain he grew up fast
his nursed young stuck with the family
they couldn't pay her anything but her
sense of duty to young Joe and ly and to
the family knew no bounds let me quote
from something Joe once said I'm quoting
Han suyin book eldest son Joe and lie in
the making of modern China
he once said quote my own mother was
gentle and tender but she was not well
educated for the Wong family did not
believe in education for women but from
her I learned kindness forbearance I
have some of her character ambition has
been left out of me my adoptive mother
was well educated her parents were
enlightened she taught me to love
knowledge and to use my mind my nurse
took me to her home by the Grand Canal
and from her I learned how the working
people lived
she taught me unselfishness end quote
eleven twelve years old the equivalent
of an American fifth sixth grader young
Joelle I was hustling trying to make
ends meet at a time when the Ching
dynasty was just about but not quite
ready to topple after turning the corner
at the second half of Qin Long's long
reign the slow steady decline and the
Manchu Qing dynasty's fortunes had
finally come down to the
it was what you'd call a stable time in
China but this was the world Joe and I
was operating in a youngster still
wearing a queue taking care of his
family in the spring of 1910 Joe was
sent north to Xianyang for a short
stretch where he was taken in by Joey
nuns eldest brother
Joey Chen this would be his bought food
here Joe had his first taste of formal
schooling but this bah fool Joie Chen
suddenly received a posting for a
position in Shanghai so young Joe and I
was again passed off to yet another
brother of Joey nun this brother Joey
Gunn he was important and it's nothing
that he did he and his wife were
childless and were willing to take on
the responsibilities of their nephew
they too lived in Shenyang but later
Joey gung got posted to Tianjin and
there in Tianjin Joe and I took his
first step on a path he never wavered
from till the end of his days the long
and winding path that would lead Joe to
Mao Zedong started in Tianjin so much
happened in Tianjin first of all it was
a treaty port and one of the most
cosmopolitan and modern cities in China
here Joe received his first exposure to
Western education and writings in
Tanjung he also first came across the
works of Joel wrong and Zoe's 1903 work
gumming June or Revolutionary Army and
like millions of other young Chinese he
also read Konya way and lian-chu chow
with the recent demise of the Qing
Dynasty there was a kind of euphoria in
the air about where China might go from
here in September 1913
Joey gung was able to get his nephew and
Lai placed into the recently established
nan Chi middle school this school was
established by a very innovative
educator of his day Yin Xiu Yin had been
a major proponent of the new learning
and was all for chucking the old
traditional education system and
adopting one that was more modern and
relevant nan Chi middle school was a
very unique and groundbreaking school in
its
de Jong boiling served as the president
of nan Chi he was another major
innovator in his day and a pioneer in
education might come as no surprise that
both yen's show and john-boy Ling both
noticed young Jo and ly you could say
they took him under their wing they knew
his family was struggling and so they
facilitated Jo's entry into nan Chi and
Jo got involved in sports and many other
extracurricular activities and one that
he particularly had a passion for was
writing and publishing as Jo began to
blossom at nan Chi middle school the
European mainland was raging with the
bloodiest goriest military conflict in
its history intellectuals and other
literate people in China were consuming
these magazines newsletters and
pamphlets that were available everywhere
and inspired people to rise up and be
counted Joe's first entree into this
world was a journal he ran from October
1914 to June 1917 called jingyan or
respect work he also got involved in and
worked his way to the top of the
school's official weekly journal called
shall thong or school wind nong khai
middle school was proving to be an
excellent incubator for teenage joanne
lie under the mentorship of Yin Xiu and
Chang boy Ling
Joe had emerged as someone so obviously
brimming with potential and another
thing if you look at all the early
photos of Jo and ly and his teens he was
a Hollywood heartthrob to have those
looks
coupled with the charisma he used in a
mind almost had no limits it was only
natural that he would be selected to
speak at his classes graduation ceremony
in 1970 after nan Chi the next stop for
Joe and ly was Japan he remember from
past CHP episodes going to Japan to
study was something a lot of Chinese did
during the World War one years Joe like
so many others decided to go to Japan
and to try and soak up whatever he could
that Japan had to offer in the way of
new ideas that were suitable for China
if Japan was a possible model for
China's future political system he
wanted to see for himself they obviously
knew something China didn't so in July
1917 after first stopping off in
Shenyang Joe and Lai headed out to Japan
these turned out to be too rough years a
lot was happening in Joanne lies life to
distract him during this period he was
constantly broke always living off of
the kindness of others no matter how
hard he tried he just couldn't pick up
Japanese nor was he thriving of the
Japanese educational system exam after
exam ended in failure all the while he
agonized over his family's plight back
in China he knew they were struggling
and there wasn't anything he could do
about it
one of his uncle's died while he was in
Japan he had also discovered the
pleasures of sake and tended to overdo
it it was not a good time but like a lot
of his fellow Chinese students trying to
get by in Japan he agonized about the
homeland and what he could do about it
whilst in Japan Joe discovered Chen do
shows new youth magazine xin Ching Dean
Chun's writing affected Joe like it
affected everyone who read it the
October Revolution had just gone down in
Russia suddenly all this talk literature
and ideas began to be passed about and
the impact it had on radicalization was
profound it was all over Japan and Joe
got his first whiff actually he had run
across new youth magazine during his nan
Chi middle school days but it didn't hit
him like it did now during his Japan
years during the period of this Japan
stay everything became crystal clear to
Chou Enlai as far as the path China
needed to take to revive itself there
wasn't the Japanese model he saw what
everyone else saw an expansionist Japan
no better or no worse than the other
imperialist nations all grabbing for
their own piece of China to hold on to
and exploit and make
fifth 1919 jo-ann la left Japan carrying
all this experience back to China May
4th
had just happened giddy on marxist
ideology jo enrolled at nong khai
university academic affairs played a
major backseat to Jo's new passion
organizing and interacting with other
like-minded students with passions
similarly inflamed from the impact of
May 4th the student newspaper was called
the ten genes Student Union the chinjung
shichong Lee and Hawaii ball this was
Jo's outlet to express himself this was
no small fly-by-night publication it had
a circulation of more than 20,000
readers including student leaders from
all over China fresh with the experience
of his time in Japan and the fire that
ignited so many passions on May 4th Jo
plunged deep into the pool of student
activism so big of a splash to this
student paper cause it ended up getting
shut down by the authorities on August
22nd 1919 a few weeks later Jo along
with 20 other student leaders
established the Jerusha or Awakening
Society other students from the ten gene
patriotic Association of women joined as
well the youngest among them little
thunking Chou all of 16 years old and
already a Hellraiser she was something
else done Ying Chau had been reading
Joanne lies work since she was 13 years
old after her father died when she was
just a kid growing up in Guang XI the
father's family wouldn't have anything
to do with her or her mother like Joanne
ly Tung Yun Chao chance to have an
amazing mother and her mother
young-jun molded little Yun Chao into
what she became educated fearless
independent and tough another noted
member was Leo Qing yang she was dating
a fellow nan Chi University student
named Zhang shun fool Leo was a friend
of Lata Chao you remember that name of
course he was the librarian at Peking
University who later on with Chandu show
co-founded the
Chinese Communist Party leader child's
assistant at the library you remember
was a guy named Mao Zedong later on Leo
Qing yang and Chang Shan Phu end up
playing a rather important role in Joe's
story Joe and I was instantly
recognizable as a standout he was
offered the chairmanship of the
awakening Society but like he usually
did he passed on the top spot and
preferred to work behind the scenes
facilitating everything right when the
awakening Society was established Lita
Chao came to Tianjin and spoke to them
about Marxism and Bolshevism meanwhile
Joe and Lai was feasting on the buffet
of possibilities that this ideology
offered Japan was really acting
aggressively in China like never before
emboldened by their gains from Germany's
losses in Shandong Japan began eyeing
the riches of Manchuria North China
protests and demonstrations were
happening with greater frequency than
ever before miss of course made the
establishment quite alarmed and as this
student and worker radicalism began to
rise so did government push back the
capitalist class wanted to see anything
except all this talk of better
conditions for the oppressed classes the
talk produced at these protests ran
counter to what the government the
Warlord's the Japanese and other
foreigners were counting on crackdowns
ensued and a lot of these student
leaders wound up in prison a
high-profile rabble rouser like Joe and
Lai was quickly caught in the net and it
was only a matter of time before Joe
would get arrested January 29th 1920s
sure enough he leads a protest to the
governor's office and the next thing you
know he gets thrown in the slammer for
six months he wasn't wearing a ball and
chain or breaking rocks but he did serve
his time along with many other
like-minded individuals and there were
no doubt endless hours spent reading
exchanging ideas and debating the issues
he made the best of his incarceration
and when he walked out of there Joe and
lies street cred and share price
received a nice shot of adrenaline
Joe picked up right where he left off
19:20 headed up to Beijing and met with
Lita Chow and work together with other
student leaders together with these
like-minded students Joe formed a kind
of Federation that helped to promote the
more efficient exchanging of ideas and
information about reform amongst all the
students across China like yen Show and
Chiang falling at nan Chi Li da Chou
also saw something unique and special in
joy and life and took an interest in him
he recognized Joe's incredible
organizing skills and how he was so
smooth and the manner he conducted
himself yet show in cooperation with the
sino-french educational commission
established this fund that allowed
chinese students to go to France and
study things like Western government
science and politics Joe was one of the
students given a chance and received a
monthly stipend to cover all his basic
expenses in addition to this Joe also
made a little extra rice agreeing to
serve as a foreign correspondent in
Paris for a local Tianjin daily unlike
Don Xiao ping who we recall was on a
work-study program that ended up being
high on work and low on study Joe had
his way paid he didn't have to deal with
the whole nine to five thing without the
need to always hustle for his next meal
Joe was able to focus more intently on
activities of a more revolutionary
nature he sailed on the French vessel
Porthos on November 7th 1920 arriving in
Marseilles December 13th he didn't stay
long and France Joe made his way to
London
arriving January 5th 1921 after a
five-week stint he found London town a
little pricey so he headed back to
France in France Joe got to learn about
and better understand what communism was
he was already quite certain this was
the answer for China humor Leo Qing yang
and Zhong Shan foo they too came to
France in early 1921 John was a lecturer
at Peking University and was already a
committed
- his wife Leo chengyang was offered a
position to teach in Lyon and of
sino-french University there both of
them were instructed by Chun to show
himself to establish Chinese Communist
Party cell in Paris this was the other
reason they were there and in May 1921
jong-un Leo reeled in quite a nice-sized
fish when they sponsored Joanne lies
membership to the Chinese Communist
Party and if they never did another
thing again to be able to say I
recruited Joanne Lyon to the party was
quite an achievement
he was admitted the following summer
Jo's work and effectiveness as an
organizer and publisher put a lot of
shine on him his reputation as someone
who got things done became well-known
around town so organized and vociferous
were these radicalized students becoming
that the French authorities began to
feel a bit uneasy and when the police
moved in and started arresting as many
of these Chinese of radicals as they
could catch they were all taken to
Marseille and kicked out of France Joe
was not among those he laid low and
continued on secretly with his agitating
organizing and recruiting it was all
great practice for what lay ahead the
Communist Party of China we all remember
from CHP episodes 48 and 61 was found at
July 1st 1921 in Shanghai Joe and ly
along with 22 other comrades formed the
Chinese youth Communist Party in Europe
it was considered a branch of the CCP
Joe as the case always will be doesn't
head the organization but serves as
director of propaganda instead he had
spent the winter of 1921 1922 in Berlin
coordinating activities out there and
setting up communist cells in Germany
and Belgium the following year February
1923 the name of the organization was
changed the Chinese Communist Youth
League in Europe they were directly
under the Chinese socialist Youth League
established in China May 1922 Joe was
made general secretary which put him in
charge of recruiting organizing and
coordinating all activities
the words he had to do almost everything
they couldn't have picked a more
suitable person to fill those shoes at
the third Party Congress in June 1923
the CCP decided that they would obey the
orders from their Comintern masters and
fully cooperate with the KMT the
guangdong to join together in a united
front to rid china of these parasitic
and destructive warlords and in this new
dynamic Joe and Lai already well-known
and respected as a major guy in the
European communist movement began to
work directly with none other a
personage than Sun yat-sen himself in
November 1923 sun sent one of his people
to leon to set up a kmt branch there
they were met by Joe and Lai who worked
with this representative to get the
Paris liaison office of the KMT set up
and operational Joe has made the
director of the general office also part
of this new organization whirly futon
and niranjan to comrades who like Joe
would go on to carve out a name for
themselves and PRC history in fact the
previous October Joe had already
sponsored Judah's membership into the
party and then came the next milestone
and Joe and lies life he met dung Xiao
ping you can see how during these years
19 21 22 23 many of these giants of
early PRC history are slowly slowly
beginning to coalesce in Europe they are
organized around Joe in China as well it
is all coming together in a slow but
steady way Joe was the natural choice to
be put in charge of the party Journal
red light or jerk Wong this was an
important publication and the movement
and all the top eyes and both the party
in China and Russia read it under Joe it
became a leading United Front
publication and in France Joe worked
side by side with nineteen-year-old dong
Xiao ping who famously operated the
mimeograph machine the Joe Tong relation
ship lasted more than four decades and
it all began here we all know this isn't
gonna last but at least for a little
while the emerging CCP will join
together with the ruling KMT and a
united front these were on easy bed
partners from the very start but they
didn't know back then what we all know
now I'm the strength of the face of Sun
yat-sen and Russian funding and support
everyone in the struggling Republic of
China went along with this so
enthusiastically did Joe throw himself
into his work helping the KMT to get all
set up in Europe in no time at all he
was already a major somebody in the eyes
of the KMT so effective is his work
carrying out KMT directives for Europe
Joe is called back to China to
essentially do the same thing in China
that he did in Europe both the
Communists and the KMT flew the banner
of defeating the Warlord's but that one
thing aside from the very genesis of the
United Front CCP and KMT leaders knew
this was a shotgun marriage and they
better watch their backs and keep their
eyes and ears open in the face of so
much pressure from French police things
began to wind down for all these
remaining Chinese students they're in
groups and singly they all began to
leave some like Joe went straight back
to China others went back via Russia
were they lingered awhile and bask in
the glory of the new socialist paradise
as a group these Chinese comrades became
known as the French returnees Joe and
Lai was the most prominent to this group
after three years and eight months in
Europe Joe along with other future CCP
luminaries arrived back in China via
Hong Kong on September 1st 1924 as the
one chiefly responsible for building up
the CCP in Europe he left quite an
achievement but this time Joe had
managed to compile
hell of a Rolodex many of these names
would go on to serve in the Politburo
and Standing Committee Joe's time in
France provided him with excellent
training in how to evade the authorities
pretty much from this point forward on
and off until 1949 Joe and I was a most
wanted man as we'll see there are times
like now in his capacity as part of the
United Front where Joe operated openly
in France right under the noses of the
police who watched the every move of
these radical Chinese students and
workers Joe organized and led all kinds
of activities Joe would have more than
his share of close calls but try as they
might the KMT secret police had one heck
of a time trying to catch Joe and lie
cheating the important thing to remember
during this United Front period 1923 to
1927 was that it was a game Stalin
played as he bided his time trying to
figure out which horse to bet on
remember China and Russia share a 2600
mile long non-contiguous border if he
thought having China as a neighbor
wasn't such a good thing he wanted to
make sure he had the lesser of two evils
across the border Sun yat-sen's KMT was
struggling in the West and wasn't being
terribly enthusiastic or generous with
political and military support this
opened the door for the Soviet Union Sun
yat-sen held his nose and cozied up with
Russia Stalin had what he wanted now he
could manipulate the KMT while he bided
his time to see if the CCP was worth
placing his chips on ever since June of
1920 the way in which Russia kept an eye
and overseas communist organizations was
through the Comintern the Communist
international some of these Comintern
agents were good some were not so good
they were sent to China to show everyone
how the whole communist thing worked
they also provided funding for all
activities and whatever they told these
CCP members to do they had to do it one
of the orders was to
the KMT they didn't have to give up
their CCP membership they could be sort
of like a dual resident they joined the
KMT as individual members and in the
spirit of the United Front they all
pretended to read from one single hymnal
that was hard enough to do while Sun
yat-sen was alive but the war fool
leaves his earthly form in May 1925 so
early in the movie now Sun yat-sen the
glue who held everything together was
gone this is where things start to get a
little dicey the ccp knew they had a
good thing compared to the organisation
and apparatus of the KMT they were still
wearing diapers they had a lot to learn
and needed time to grow if the KMT was
open to act as a willing host they had
no problem being the virus and using
this state of affairs to spread Jo and
lie with all his street cred and glowing
cv openly wore two hats first he was
Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party
of Guangdong and Guangxi this isn't the
party center but it's still a big
posting at the same time he was made the
political director of the first army of
the newly created and Soviet funded
Whampoa Military Academy the blokes who
actually ran things were the agents from
the Comintern Russia wasn't about to
hand some blank check to China
everything went through these guys and
if they ordered the KMT to play nice
with the Communists KMT had to listen Jo
held the rank of major-general that was
perfectly positioned inside the
operation to carefully grow and nurture
the CCP Jo as well as yet geunyang got
to lead troops into battle in what was
known as the eastern campaign against
the warlord and former Sun Ally and
later nemesis Chang Chong Ming this
campaign against this warlord in
February in March 1925 was a total
defeat for Chun and he ended up fleeing
to Hong Kong where he railed against Sun
and later against Zhang wen Chang Chong
Ming was
out of the way all of Guangdong fell
internationalist control
we don't usually equate Joe and ly with
military affairs but during this period
for about a decade between 1925 and 1935
Joe was hands-on as far as his
involvement in military planning and
execution this Eastern campaign was a
great training session for Joe and
taught him quite a bit about military
planning and operation even John
kai-shek rewarded Joe for his role in
the defeat of Chen Xiang Ming's army and
after this Joe was made a special
commander of the Shonto region in early
1925 the Communist Party of China had a
total membership of less than a thousand
two years later membership hovered near
58,000 the communists received a shot in
the arm from the May 30th movement 1925
I'm sure you remember from past episodes
British soldiers killed 56 protesting
workers in shaumyan Guangzhou and then
another 12 in Shanghai and this led to a
general strike that lasted for 18 months
and brought international commerce to
its knees
not only in Shanghai but Guangzhou and
Hong Kong as well around this time this
Guangzhou period of Joe and lies life he
first met Mao Mao was also establishing
a name for himself as an up-and-coming
leader in Hunan he was a little bit too
radical for the leadership and enjoyed
nowhere near the prestige that Joe had
Joe also met with an old colleague from
his days in France this was Ho Chi Minh
Joe and ly and Ho Chi Minh worked very
closely in the early communist movement
in Vietnam also at the fourth Party
Congress held in Shanghai in January
1925 Joe requested permission and was
approved by the party center to marry
dummying Chau she thereupon sailed down
to Guangzhou from 10:00 Jane and arrived
in July of that year no one met her at
the dock
she had an address written down and
where to go and off she went and they
were married on August 8th 1925 in
Guangzhou there was a wedding party
well that the type inkwon in Guangzhou
and Beijing Lu I went there a couple
trips ago just to experience back in its
heyday was one of the first if not the
first Chinese managed restaurant serving
western food it was considered sort of a
novelty to the Chinese in any case it's
still around and I had a lousy meal
there but was nonetheless conscious the
whole time of sharing this space with Jo
and live albeit nine decades later as
smooth and low-key as Jo and I was in
his recruiting activities and in
building up the Communist Party in
Guangzhou the KMT leaders knew full well
what he was up to they just couldn't
catch him but in March 1926 right-wing
elements in the KMT put their heads
together and were determined to find an
excuse to push back against the growing
strength and potential political power
the CCP was building not only did they
want to crack down on the Communists
they were tired of the Comintern always
making monkeys out of them they wanted
to terminate that business relationship
Zhang Kai shek was the main person in
charge at the Whampoa Military Academy
he saw how the army was being openly and
secretly infiltrated with communists and
left-leaning elements Chi Yong began to
try and smoke out Jo and lie he did this
first by putting Jo on the spot and
requested him to provide a list of all
CCP members in the first army and those
enrolled at the Academy January 1926
Joanne lies Secretary was arrested for
getting caught passing secret messages
to the party center in Shanghai
whenever something like this went down
John became more and more aggressive in
the manner he would protest to Jo and
accuse him of faking support for the
United Front in March of 1926 the Joan
Shan gunboat incident went down this was
a boat with a mostly communists crew
that for some reason maybe they were
given orders specifically to provoke an
incident whatever the case this gunboats
sailed from Whampoa downriver to
Guangzhou Jian
claim no knowledge of this order an
accused Joe of trying to make some kind
of power play this gave John the perfect
pretext to come down hard the commander
of the gunboat was immediately arrested
the first Army Headquarters was raided
as was the Whampoa Military Academy
there was a massive roundup of all
Communists and yet wrong John was one of
the fish caught in that particular net
young promptly declared martial law and
had all pro-communist elements booted
out of the KMT 250 communists were
thrown out of the Whampoa Military
Academy Joe and Lai had just returned
from Shonto when all this went down he
was arrested at first but released he
went straight to see John kai-shek to
ask what the hell man but John turned
the tables and started pointing fingers
at Joe accusing him of causing all this
and dealing in bad faith you know this
was the strategy John adopted to claim
that he was the victim he cried to the
Soviets and said that it was only he who
was following the rules and Joe was
double-dealing and all this was his
fault
young despite a growing dislike for the
Soviets that bordered on hatred no he
couldn't blow them off just yet the
Nationalists were still dependent on all
this Soviet financial and military
support
chiana's dilemma was how to get rid of
the Communists but keep the Soviet aid
Stalin was having a good time playing
everyone for fools careful not to push
too young too far he made everyone
apologize to the Generalissimo even
Chandu show expressed his regrets to
Chang on April 11th feeling confident at
the turn of events Jung dismissed Joe as
director of the political department of
the Academy and as head of the Shantou
Regional Committee so the Joan Shan
gunboat incident pretty much gave Jung
almost everything he hoped for the
Communists were back on their heels in
1926 and Joe's role had been diminished
we're gonna pick up next time in the
summer of 1926 with the launch of the
northern expedition
Joe's role in the party will continue to
become more and more critical to the
survival of the CCP especially during
its darkest hour will save all that for
next episode Joe and I and the whole CCP
apparatus still have a hard way to go
before they arrive in the promised land
in this episode have wanted to just
trace the steps that molded Joe analyze
character and turned him into this
ultimate political operative though
nowhere near facing the life of a
hardscrabble peasant he nonetheless ate
quite a lot of bitterness growing up in
his particular circumstances but along
each step of the way Joe and I had
relatives and mentors who recognized
something special in him and all went
out of their way to lend support at
critical times his time spent at nong
khai middle school and university was a
turning point in his life by this time
he pretty much knew what he wanted to be
when he grew up
Nong Khai led to Japan which led him
back to China May fourth happened he
does his six-month stretch in prison
then began his French period in Europe
Joe and I was able to spread his wings
and everyone who knew him are knew of
him were blown away at his
organizational and recruiting skills and
his political savvy and savoir faire in
almost any situation we made it up to
1926 it's been a year since Sun yat-sen
tragically passed away at a time when
China and never needed him more the
entire United Front has turned into this
Cantonese opera with the Chong Shan
gunboat incident Zhang kai-shek is
starting to feel around the edges to see
where the weaknesses were that he could
exploit John knew exactly what Joe and I
was up to
because 28 year old Joe was by 1926 such
a high-profile political figure the
Comintern demanded special handling in
his case so john couldn't do what he
probably wished he could do which was
have joe rubbed out but cks did file
that thought away and that's all for
next time no kidding I was sure I was
going to get as far as the Zuni
conference
in this episode maybe I better pick up
the pace a little almost fifty minutes
let's say we are well into stoppage time
so let's just pull the plug right here I
know you're all secretly hoping the CHP
is gonna follow up the historic tees of
China with something else perhaps
suitable for the upcoming holiday season
your wish may come true details
forthcoming once again the China money
Network calm host Nina Chun is
internationally renowned China Money
podcast where you can get the skinny on
everything that's going on in China
finance and investment there in iTunes
and all the major podcast aggregators
great Seneca a couple weeks ago Ron
emitter Wow
I listened to that one in my palatial
suite at the encore in Vegas I was in
town for the money 2020 show had some
downtime ordered a nice expensive room
service and sat back and enjoyed that
episode over a fine glass of Avion
Seneca always was and always will be one
of my faves and may I personally
recommend once again the anthill org for
all lovers of fine fiction and
non-fiction works allagash Tom Pellman
and some of the most talented writers in
China be looking and November for the
definitive anthology of the best to come
out of that superb writers colony the
finest in China if you'd like my
absolutely worthless opinion the anthill
org more Joe and line next time and at
the rate we're going probably for the
next several episodes after that as well
this is Lhasa Montgomery bidding you a
fond farewell from a bone-dry Los
Angeles California come on Texas here's
some of that rain with us would you may
you find it in your hearts to join me
next time for another exciting episode
of the China history podcast